---
title: Private (non) investment in monopoly infrastructure
tags: [civic life, infrastructure, tax policy, investment, monopolies, nuclear energy, PG&E]
date: 2015-04-21, 10.50
---
A few news items over the last week conspired to inspire me to vent.

First of all, PG&E has been fined for it's San Bruno pipeline
explosion, and they just had another one near Fresno (however, that
one may, or may not be a maintenance fault).  An interesting
side--note is that PG&E was granted a rate hike last year by the
California Public Utilities Commission to cover their costs in
improving infrastructure safety.

The other was an article in the
Wall Street Journal this last week stating that a number of nuclear
power station operators in the US are looking to charge their
customers, through rate hikes, for either lifetime extension programs
or decommissioning costs.

In both these cases, the supplier is a regulated, formal or *de facto*
monopoly.  Also, they are generally private corporations that are
beholden to shareholder/owners, many of which are very limited in
their ownership goals (read, short to mid term share price growth).

Another thing that is common, that in both cases, these are
long--lived pieces of infrastructure, both pipelines and nuclear power
stations have lifetimes measured in decades.  It is also generally
understood that long--lived infrastructure needs continue maintenance
work, and that, at some point, it will need to be replaced and
decommissioned.  These costs should not come as a surprise to an
entity that builds and operates such infrastructure, nor should it
come as a surprise to the regulators that supervise them.

In fact, they have, and do, recognize that.  In all these cases, the
operator has justified part of their rate requests to their regulators
as the necessary costs of maintaining that infrastructure.  In short,
the rate payers have been paying for that maintenance and eventual
replacement or decommissioning from the start, it's built into the
rate.  In fact, in the case of PG&E, it's covered in the gas
transmission rate.

So, if we've paid for it, why are we being asked to pay for it again?
In the case of PG&E, the maintenance we've already paid for was
obviously (and tragically) not sufficient, or the monies that were
paid were re--directed elsewhere.  In the case of future costs to
extend or replace the nuclear plants, we're being asked to pay again
because, hopefully, the operator has discovered that what we've paid
wasn't enough.  If that is the case, why?  Were they just bad in their
budgeting, or again, did the monies go to something else?

Most companies would not have the cojones to ask for a customer to pay
a second time for the company's mis--management.  When Ford had the
exploding Pinto problem, they didn't ask their customers to pay more
for the cars going forward to cover the cost of necessary
re--engineering.  Why, because the customers would, rightfully, take
their business elsewhere.  So, why do these regulated industries think
they can ask their customers to fund the company's mismanagement?  One
word --- monopoly.  The customer *can't* take their business elsewhere,
they are captive.

The reason for this disparate behavior is simple.  In a non--monopoly
company the loss of a customer is a direct hit to the bottom line.  It
is much more expensive to acquire a new customer than to keep an
existing one.  If a company shed lots of customers because they asked
those same customers to fund the management's failure, the
shareholders would be the one that suffered and would probably loose
more money than what they would loose if the company paid to fix their
iatrongenic problem.

On the other hand, since the customers of the monopoly company are
captive, they can't be "lost."  Therefore, the costs to the
shareholders of asking those customers to fund the mismanagement,
there is no cost, whereas the company just "manning up" and paying to
fix its problem would have an impact to the bottom line, and therefore
the shareholders.  Actually, the situation is worse.  Because there
are no (or little) consequences to the company (and therefore the
shareholders) for the mismanagement, there is even an incentive to
mismanage that long--term maintenance investment, not grossly, but
things like *delayed maintenance* or *value engineering* become,
potentially, more prevalent.

So, how do we fix this?  It's not easy, or we already would have done
so.  But, in short, we should enforce rules for regulated monopolies
that basically state that they carry the something approximating
unlimited liability for a
service if they use that service as a justification for a rate model.
If it then becomes obvious that they are not, or have not, performed,
the company should remedy the situation without recourse to the rate
payers.  If they are found to be incompetent in doing so, then the
regulator should find a provider who can rectify the deficiency(s)
with the cost being born by the company that collected the revenues to
provide that service.

This would more closely align the shareholder with the customer, and
enforce the drive for competent management of these critical and
capital intensive infrastructures.  Remember, this is really only
relevant for monopoly services.  if the customer can *realistically*
obtain the service from other providers, then this may not be
necessary, as commercial pressure should force the company to perform.

